Add document for User Groups (#3564)
open-telemetry/community: guides/contributor/user-groups.md

Reviewer: Don't forget to add it to the ToC here:
https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/tree/main/guides#opentelemetry-guidebooks

Author: done!

glad to help you figure out where you fit.

## How to start one

There's no gatekeeping here. A rough recipe:

1. **Gauge interest.** Mention the idea in a relevant existing Slack channel, on
   social media, or at a meeting. You don't need a crowd, a handful of
   interested people is a fine start.
2. **Pick a name.** See [Naming & branding](#naming--branding) below.
3. **Find one or two organizers.** Someone to keep the channel alive, schedule
   the occasional meeting, and welcome newcomers. It doesn't have to be you
   alone.
4. **Request a space to talk** (see below).
5. **Tell people it exists.** You're welcome to have your group listed as an
   unofficial-but-welcomed community (see
   [Getting your group listed](#getting-your-group-listed)).

### Spaces the project can offer

OpenTelemetry lives in the **CNCF Slack**. If you're not there yet, sign up at
[slack.cncf.io](https://slack.cncf.io/) and join the `#opentelemetry` channel —
that's the project's main channel and the best place to start a conversation.

For a User Group, the project can offer:

- **A dedicated Slack channel** named `#otel-<name>` (e.g. `#otel-healthcare`),

>   with the OpenTelemetry Admin user as a channel manager. Ask in `#opentelemetry` and

Reviewer 2: We could also add a Slack automation for first-time joiners to the channel that says "this is part of an OpenTelemetry User Group"

Author: good point!

[Linux Foundation Trademark Usage Guidelines](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/trademark-usage).
Please read them before naming your group. In short, you may use the mark to
describe what your group is about, but you may not use it in a way that implies
your group is an official OpenTelemetry product or that the project endorses it.

- **Group name:** name your group as a *User Group for* your topic rather than
  folding the mark into a new product-like name. For example, prefer
  **"OpenTelemetry User Group for Industrial Applications"** over "OpenTelemetry
  Industrial". The "User Group for …" construction makes clear that this is a
  community using OpenTelemetry, which is exactly what it is. If you're unsure
  whether a name is acceptable, ask the project, or reach out to
  [trademarks@linuxfoundation.org](mailto:trademarks@linuxfoundation.org).
- **Slack channel:** `#otel-<name>` (e.g. `#otel-telco`). Do not name it `#opentelemetry-<name>`
- **GitHub:** if your group wants a place for code or documents, use a **personal
  repository** — there's no need for (and we'd rather you not
  create) a separate GitHub organization. You may prefix the repository name with

>   `otel-` (e.g. `otel-telco-examples`) to make it discoverable.

Reviewer 2: I'd add here some sort of "please add the disclaimer in the appendix" which can be something like:

```md
> [!NOTE]
>
> This is an [OpenTelemetry User Group](link to this doc). It is not an official body within the OpenTelemetry project. It is subject to the [CNCF Code of Conduct](link to CoC).
```

- **Licensing:** license any code or content you publish under **Apache-2.0**.
  Beyond being permissive and well-understood, it keeps the door open for a clean
  donation to the OpenTelemetry project later, should your group's work ever grow
  into something the project wants to adopt.

When in doubt about a name or logo usage, ask — it's much easier to adjust early
than after a group has momentum.

> ## Getting your group listed

Reviewer 2: Where would this list be?

Author: that's TBD, we can have it on opentelemetry.io or somewhere on the community README or both

# OpenTelemetry User Groups

OpenTelemetry is used across an enormous range of industries, domains, and
environments — far more than the project's official structures can or should
track directly.

Making something *official* in OpenTelemetry, like forming a
[SIG](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/community-members.md),
starting a new project, or donating code under the
[project management](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/project-management.md)
and [donation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/guides/contributor/donations.md)

> guidelines, is deliberately a heavy process with real requirements. That

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
guidelines, is deliberately a heavy process with well defined requirements. That
```

Reviewer 4: well-defined* ?

Reviewer 3: Fair point, I never know when to use a hyphen and when not to be honest 😅

Author: ```suggestion
guidelines, is deliberately a heavy process with well-defined requirements. That
```

**core**. There's no application and nothing to get approved. We want these
groups to exist, and this page explains how to start one and what help is
available from the project.

## What is a User Group?

An OUG is an informal, self-organized community of people interested
in a specific theme within the OpenTelemetry ecosystem: a place where interest
can gather, people can compare notes, and ideas can grow.

Good examples of themes for a User Group:

- An **industry or vertical** — e.g. OpenTelemetry in healthcare, finance,
  telco, or automotive, where adopters share domain-specific practices and
  constraints.
- A **class of technology or environment** — e.g. OpenTelemetry for databases,
  or on embedded and resource-constrained devices, where a distinct set of
  problems brings people together.

If people are curious about a topic and want to explore it together, that's
enough. There are no size or seriousness thresholds.

User Groups are **not**:

- **A replacement for existing project work.** Areas the project already
  organizes around already have a home, i.e. the language implementations (.NET, Java, Go, …), the

>   Collector, semantic conventions, and so on. Use the

Reviewer 5: Would it make sense to tighten scoping of semantic conventions
```suggestion
  Collector, semantic convention domains, and so on. Use the
```

Reason is i see a user group as being the natural owner of refinements to a core domain definition. Ie the grpc user group would own the grpc refinement of the rpc conventions & any additional attributes specific to their refinement.

Author: To own the rpc conventions you need to go through the project propsal process and by that the group of people working on that are a sub-group of Semantic Conventions SIG and or their own SIG (t.b.h. I am not sure how we distinguish this today, but that's not part of this proposal).

So what would work is that a group of people comes together as a "RPC SemConv OTel User Group", they talk and make plans, and eventually they stand up a project proposal and say "hey, this is what we want ot do", from there _technically_ two entities exist, the one within the core project and the user group which may or may not do additional work as well.

The goal of this proposal is to create a recommendation not a process, so if we say "a user group owns" or "you must form a user group to do x", this adds overhead I rather want to avoid. I'd rather say, forming a user group before submitting a proposal is a route to success.

Reviewer 5: I am not talking about a user group owning the conventions defined for the rpc domain, but rather just the refinements/adjustments to the rpc conventions specific to grpc. The grpc conventions take the rpc conventions as a dependency.

Another example is db, the oracle db refinements may be owned by an oracle db user group which is what the case currently is.

Hence my change just makes it clearer that user groups are not to own the semantic convention domains.

the [OpenTelemetry Slack channel](#spaces-the-project-can-offer). Folks are
glad to help you figure out where you fit.

## How to start one

There's no gatekeeping here. A rough recipe:

1. **Gauge interest.** Mention the idea in a relevant existing Slack channel, on
   social media, or at a meeting. You don't need a crowd, a handful of
   interested people is a fine start.
2. **Pick a name.** See [Naming & branding](#naming--branding) below.
3. **Find one or two organizers.** Someone to keep the channel alive, schedule
   the occasional meeting, and welcome newcomers. It doesn't have to be you
   alone.
4. **Request a space to talk** (see below).
5. **Tell people it exists.** You're welcome to have your group listed as an
   unofficial-but-welcomed community (see
   [Getting your group listed](#getting-your-group-listed)).

### Spaces the project can offer

OpenTelemetry lives in the **CNCF Slack**. If you're not there yet, sign up at
[slack.cncf.io](https://slack.cncf.io/) and join the `#opentelemetry` channel —
that's the project's main channel and the best place to start a conversation.

For a User Group, the project can offer:

> - **A dedicated Slack channel** named `#otel-<name>` (e.g. `#otel-healthcare`),

Reviewer 5: Would it make sense to prefix the channel with #otel_ug instead that way it is clearly a user group. Scenario is if we had a user group for wearables #otel_wearable if would look just like #otel_browsers with the later being a sig/project.

Reviewer 4: Ooo I think this is a good consideration. I'm good with `#otel-ug-*`.

Author: works for me

Author: fixed!

  with the OpenTelemetry Admin user as a channel manager. Ask in `#opentelemetry` and
  an admin can create it.
- **Access to the OpenTelemetry Zoom** for regular meetings, if your group wants

>   to meet synchronously.

Reviewer 3: I think this is something that https://ocgroups.dev/ could offer as the recommended CNCF solution for community groups. Group organizers can create their own Zoom links and recording is available as option (I've not tried it but I presume recording will go to the hosts email to handle later, potentially guests too).

This would allow groups to manage their own recordings. There are certain limitations (e.g. they have to set a max of attendees, and it can only be repeated 12 times) but I think those are pretty minor.

<img width="1073" height="1258" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2017fcf2-0d5b-4e70-a4a9-d97642c33f44" />

Author: Oh wow, that's really cool! Let me add this in.

Reviewer 3: I cannot resolve the thread (no write permissions) but feel free to do so as per the change below.

**unofficial but welcomed** community — for example on the OpenTelemetry website
or in the community README. Open a pull request or issue against the
[community repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/), or ask in
the community Slack channel, and someone will help get it added.

Listing helps people find your group. It does **not** confer official status.

## Where a group might go

Most User Groups will simply be communities — good ones can run for years
sharing knowledge and never need to become anything more official, and that is a
complete success. Graduating into official project work is **not** the goal, and
it isn't a ladder every group is expected to climb.

That said, groups have a way of surfacing good ideas, and sometimes an idea
wants a more official home. When that happens, a User Group can be fertile ground
for it, and the usual project paths are open:

- A group might put forward a **project proposal**, often in collaboration with
  an existing SIG. See the
  [project management guidelines](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/project-management.md).
- A group might turn out to be **adjacent to an existing SIG** — for instance the

>   [End-User SIG](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/community-members.md) —

Reviewer 3: Is this link intended to point to the community members page? I'm not sure I understand the relation.

Author: no... that's the wrong link indeed. Would https://opentelemetry.io/community/end-user/ work?

Reviewer 3: Yes, I think that's the go-to resource :)

Reviewer 3: ✅

Author: fixed!

>   and the natural move is to bring the work there.

Reviewer 6: Should there be an additional path for a User Group to be come a dedicated SIG?
Ie. if it turns out that interest is strong and there are regular contributions to core OpenTelemetry repos, then it might be worth making the group a SIG to reduce friction.

Author: Yes, this is kind of hidden in the first point that they could put forward a project proposal.... the additonal sentence "in collaboration with" might make this less obvious.

What I tried to avoid stating explcitly that this is what's going to happen, most User Groups should never become a SIG

Reviewer 6: > most User Groups should never become a SIG

Agreed, I'm fine with not calling this out as an option.
In any case whenever this would occur the existing SIGs and maintainers can give guidance on the best path forward...

Author: Exactly, it should come naturally. The thing we don't want is people form a User Group, run it for 6-12 months and then expect to be "promoted" to a SIG. My preference would be that there are LOTS of user groups, and SIGs remain the special (...) case.
